# EEcrim250
Eliza Epstein's Crim 250 Senior Thesis

TO: Maria Cuellar
FROM: Eliza Epstein
DATE: February 7, 2022
RE: New Methodology - Payment Method 

While initially my plan was to separate the CDC Natality data by FIPS codes to isolate female prisoners, I have recently discovered that prior to 2014 (with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act) states paid for childbirths for inmates. I am now planning on separating my study populations based on payment methods. My goal is to compare birth outcomes of inmates to those of a general population and to an underserved population. My most updated idea is to separate my three study populations as payment by “other government” (meaning inmates), payment by “self payer” (general population), and “medicaid” (underserved population). In Kozhimannil and Schlafers article “What The Affordable Care Act Means For Pregnant Inmates”, they describe "The ACA also allows Medicaid to pay for inmates’ care for hospital stays longer than 24 hours. Such changes have important implications for a group of inmates that is not often the focus of health policy dialogue – incarcerated pregnant women." Additionally in Markus et. al’s paper “Medicaid Covered Births, 2008 through 2010, in the context of the implementation of health reform”, they describe that “When pregnant inmates give birth, costs are generally paid by the county or state that administers the facility in which they are incarcerated.” For this reason, I will be using data prior to 2014 (before the ACA) when states paid for inmates’ childbirths. Due to the 1978 Pregnancy Discrimination Act, in about 40% of states, employer insurance plans were required to cover maternity care. While there were requirements on private insurance plans covering maternity care, there were many restrictions on state coverage (making it difficult for women to get state coverage for childbirth) - about 45% of childbirths were covered under medicaid, a separate payment method in the data. Selfishly for this paper, that is beneficial due to the fact that the implication is that few women outside of inmates were covered by the “payment by state” sector. That said, this methodology displays a clear limitation: state payment may include many more childbirths than just incarcerated women. That said, given the scale of this research paper (being an undergraduate thesis), I believe this problem can be discussed within the paper, rather than being a reason to create a new methodology. I had submitted a FOIA request to receive data on inmate birth outcomes, but was informed that this data will take up to 9 months, a time scale that I do not have. 
